>> Support for Frontline is
provided by US News & World
Report.
>> Trust.
For over 70 years, a commitment
to playing it straight, getting
it right.
US News & World Report.
Trust matters.
>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> Tonight on Frontline...
>> The judge told me, "I will
give your son 25 to life, so
you'd better take the plea.
Or if you don't take the plea,
he's getting it."
>> More than 95% of felony
convictions are the result of a
guilty plea.
>> I was willing to plea guilty
even though I wasn't, because I
had to go home to my kids.
>> He said, "We want to drop the
murder charge on you if you'll
plead guilty to robbery."
And I said, "But I haven't
robbed anybody."
>> Tonight, Frontline tells the
stories of ordinary people
caught up in a nightmare.
>> All he has to say is one word
and he gets to go home:
"Guilty."
>> How do you plea to that
reduced charge?
>> Guilty.
>> Are you pleading guilty
because you are guilty, and for
no other reason?
>> Yes, sir.
>> Would you tell the court,
please, why you were late
arriving at that meeting, Mr.
Cummings?
>> NARRATOR: Every few hours,
every day, all across the
country, new and old television
shows demonstrate justice at
work.
( Law & Order theme song
playing )
Americans love trials.
Everyone knows the rules.
>> Are these the photographs,
Mr. Cummings?
>> The Honorable Mark Burns
presiding.
>> NARRATOR: The judge.
>> I show you this weapon,
Lieutenant Drumm.
>> NARRATOR: Evidence.
>> How much are you being paid
for today's court appearance?
>> NARRATOR: Expert witnesses.
>> $3,000.
>> Objection.
This is irrelevant.
>> NARRATOR: Attorneys.
>> I don't see the relevance.
>> I do.
>> NARRATOR: Prosecutors.
>> No more questions.
>> NARRATOR: The defendant, the
jury.
>> We find the defendant guilty.
>> Not guilty.
>> We're deadlocked.
>> The public perception of our
criminal justice system is
deeply shaped by television, and
that perception is that jury
trials routinely occur as a way
of deciding whether somebody is
guilty or innocent of the
offense of which he or she is
suspected or accused.
>> Any student in a civics class
in elementary school or junior
high school will learn about a
system with a trial by jury and
a right to counsel and proof
beyond a reasonable doubt, and
it won't remotely resemble the
system that we have.
>> When your name is called,
please stand and announce that
you are here.
Kevin Washington.
Thank you.
Rosemary Gonzalez.
>> Please have a seat.
>> Thank you.
>> Pablo Hertado.
Thank you.
Mr. Martinez, how do you plead,
Sir, to assault on a family
member as alleged in cause
number 955015.
Guilty or not guilty?
>> Guilty.
>> Are you pleading guilty ...
>> Are you pleading guilty
because you are guilty and for
no other reason?
>> Yes, I am.
>> Are you guilty or not guilty?
>> Guilty.
>> How do you plead that reduced
charge?
>> Guilty.
>> NARRATOR: The sixth amendment
of the constitution guarantees
every citizen the right to be
judged by a jury of his or her
peers.
>> Do you want to give up those
guaranteed rights and proceed to
plead guilty today?
>> NARRATOR: Yet about 95% of
all people who are convicted of
felonies across the country give
up that right and plead guilty.
>> ...that in exchange for a
plea of guilty, the State has
recommended...
>> NARRATOR: Most of these
guilty pleas involve bargains in
which the accused pleads guilty
in exchange for a lesser
sentence or a reduced charge.
>> How do you plead to
aggravated robbery alleged to
have occurred...
>> The system would collapse.
If every case that was filed in
the criminal justice system were
to be set for trial, the system
would just entirely collapse.
>> A lot of people call it a
necessary evil.
I look at it as a necessary
component in our criminal
justice system.
But you have to understand that
a plea bargaining only works if
you have experienced, competent
defense attorneys, experienced,
competent prosecutors, and a
judge who will oversee and make
sure this is done... done
correctly.
>> How do you plead that reduced
charge?
>> NARRATOR: But what if one or
more of them, these key legal
figures, are not as competent as
they should be?
What happens then to the plea
bargains which are now so much a
part of the system?
Tonight we will tell several
stories.
Different people, different
charges, different parts of the
country, all with one thing in
common: the difficult dilemma of
confronting a plea.
On November 2, 2000, in Hearne,
a small town in East Texas, Erma
Faye Stewart, then 30 years old,
a single mother of two, was
arrested.
>> The officer just come up to
me and said, "Erma Stewart?"
I said, "Yeah?"
And he just, you know, say, "You
under arrest."
And, you know, he, you know, he
told me to turn around and he
put the handcuffs on me.
And I asked him for what, and
you know, he just never did say
nothing.
He just put me in the car.
>> Go down to this one, right
here.
Go down there.
>> NARRATOR: Regina Kelly, a
waitress, 24 at the time, and a
single mother of four, was also
arrested.
>> I was at work.
The police officers came in and
asked for Regina Kelly.
I said, "That's me."
And he said, "Ma'am, we have to
take you into custody."
I was like, "Oh, my god."
I knew I had tickets and I
just... I told my manager, I
said, "I'm going to jail because
I have tickets that I haven't
paid for.
I just haven't paid my traffic
tickets."
And the police officer told me,
"It's not the tickets."
And that was it.
>> NARRATOR: The cases were
prosecuted by the district
attorney of Robertson county,
John Paschall.
>> I'll tell you what, I'm going
to write this down, I'm going to
put it down with the offer I
made to you.
And you get back to me next week
and I'll do the paper work up.
Okay?
Thank you.
Bye.
>> The case began with our
narcotics task force that
operated in this county.
It conducted an undercover
operation.
And they made the cases.
And once they made the cases and
turned them over to the district
attorney's office, those cases
were then presented to a grand
jury.
And the grand jury returned
indictments in those particular
cases.
>> NARRATOR: It was part of a
big drug sweep based on a
confidential informant who would
later be proven unreliable.
He implicated 25 men and two
women with felony drug
distribution charges.
Many lived in this public
housing project.
All but one were black.
They claimed they were innocent.
They were thrown into jail with
bond set as high as $70,000
each.
Regina and Erma Faye shared a
cell with two other women.
Neither had been in jail before.
>> It was hard.
It was a cell for two people, so
me and the other girl had to
sleep on the floor.
It's concrete, it's hard, it's
cold.
What made it bad was because you
are in there and there is
nothing you can do about it, and
you are in there for something
you didn't do.
And it was hard just wondering
what's going to happen next.
>> NARRATOR: They put their
faith in their court-appointed
lawyers.
>> Our lawyers, that's really
all you have to just help you.
They went to school for this,
they know what to do.
But it didn't happen like that.
Like, when we all went to court
and got our court-appointed
lawyers, I wanted to talk to
him, sit down and talk to him
and say, "Hey, this is the type
of person I am, you know.
You can look at my background,
you can ask people in the
community."
Just... you know, I wanted him
to know about me so he could
have a better sense in how to
represent me, you know, what
type of person I am.
He didn't want to hear it.
He didn't have time, you know.
It didn't matter.
It was always an excuse
somewhere.
>> NARRATOR: Erma Faye did not
fare much better.
>> I had asked my lawyer, you
know, "What they going to do
about that, you know?"
You know, he had told me that I
was looking at ten years prison
term.
I had told him, I'm like, "For
what?
I hadn't did nothing."
>> But I want everyone in church
to get into the service.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> My lawyer came to me and
suggested ten years probation.
And like I told him I wasn't
going to take this if I did not
do this.
I didn't do this.
"They have no evidence, no
nothing.
Everything is screwed up and you
still want me to plea out with
them," and I wasn't going to do
it.
Later on, he came back with five
years probation.
The D.A. went from ten years to
five years.
And I told him the exact same
thing, and he kept urging me and
encouraging me to take it,
because if I went to trial then
I would be faced with five-to-
99.
>> He was, like, pushing me to
take the probation.
He wasn't on my side at all.
He wasn't trying to hear me.
He wasn't trying to explain
nothing to me.
And I even had told him, you
know, my understanding, you
know, is not that good so, you
know, you just really are going
to have to break it down to me,
for me, to understand.
>> INTERVIEWER: He didn't?
>> No.
>> Her name, Erma Faye Stewart?
I don't believe that I
represented an Erma Faye
Stewart.
I have to double check my
records on that.
>> NARRATOR: Bruno Shimek, Erma
Faye's court-appointed lawyer
whose name was on her plea
agreement did not remember her,
nor could he find any record
confirming that he ever
represented her.
>> I don't have a file on her,
you know, went through and
looked at all those.
And she's not a person that, you
know... Robin Stewart I
represented, Aaron Stewart, Eric
Stewart.
I've checked all those, but not
Erma.
>> NARRATOR: Steve Bright is a
defense attorney, professor of
law both at Yale and Harvard,
and the director of the Southern
Center For Human Rights in
Atlanta.
>> Well, it is not unusual for
lawyers who handle a high volume
of cases to not know their
client's names.
I go to courtrooms all the time
where you see the defense
lawyers coming in and they will
stand up in the front of the
courtroom and call the names of
their clients because they don't
know who the clients are, and
ask them to raise their hand.
>> When your name is called, if
you do not have an attorney and
you wish to have an attorney
appointed because you cannot
afford one, if you will please
so indicate we will see that you
get an attorney appointed.
Mr. Schere, would you stand?
This is Mr. John Schere, he's
the public defender for Crisp
County.
I'm going to stand aside and
give the public defender and the
attorneys an opportunity...
>> The public believes that
every criminal defendant has a
right to the effective
assistance of counsel.
That is just so far out of touch
with reality, it's hard to even
begin describing it.
>> It doesn't matter that the
lawyer may be conscientious.
Just the system makes it
impossible for that lawyer to...
to do his or her job.
>> Nicholas Octavius Johnson.
>> People may be not guilty,
people may be guilty of some
less serious behavior then what
they're accused of.
Many of the people that come
into the court system are
mentally ill, may have been put
up to it by somebody else.
The lawyer won't know any of
that.
>> I do not contend that our
jails are stuffed with people
who pleaded to things that they
didn't do.
I think most people who are
prosecuted of serious crimes are
guilty of at least what they're
charged with, and ought to have
serious criminal sanctions
attached.
But the problem is that "most"
isn't the way we do business in
a free society that cares about
individual rights and individual
liberty.
>> Happens every day in every
courtroom in the United States.
People come into arraignment,
they meet their attorney, they
have a brief conversation,
they're informed of the charges,
they're informed of what they
could plead guilty to, possibly
to get out of jail that night,
possibly not; they have to make
a decision.
That's the truth.
Less interesting story than the
one that "Law & Order" tells
people, but that's the truth.
>> NARRATOR: Three weeks after
her arrest, Regina's parents
managed to have her bond reduced
from $70,000 to $10,000, and she
went home to await trial.
Erma Faye stayed behind.
>> When she heard me on the
phone saying, "I'm going home,"
it was over with.
From that point on, it was, I
mean, it was downhill because
she was going to be by herself.
>> NARRATOR: Erma Faye then
offered to plead guilty.
>> Even though I wasn't guilty,
I was willing to plead guilty
because I had to go home to my
kids.
My son was sick.
And I asked him, "Listen now,
you know... you know, I can
plead for five-year probation,
you know, just... just let me go
home to my kid."
>> NARRATOR: The district
attorney, Erma Faye says, did
not agree to five years
probation.
He demanded ten years.
>> I had signed the paper, he
had took me back in front of the
judge, he had told the judge
that I took the ten years.
And, you know, they took me back
to my cell... after that, they
took me back to my cell, and an
hour later they had released me.
>> NARRATOR: Of the 27 people
arrested, seven pled guilty and
most of them got out on
probation.
A few posted bond and the rest
stayed in jail.
>> One reason that a lot of
people plead guilty is because
they're told that they can go
home that day, because they will
get probation.
What they usually don't take
into account is that they're
being set up to fail.
>> ...as soon as you serve five
years in state penitentiary.
I'm going to allow you to serve
that sentence on probation with
credit for the three months that
you've already served...
>> NARRATOR: There are about
four million people on probation
across the United States,
offenders who live in the
community under supervision.
>> ...pay a fine as to each
count...
>> NARRATOR: Among their
obligations, they often have to
pay fines, court charges,
probation fees and for different
treatment programs that they
must attend, all of which
constitutes a sizeable source of
revenue for local governments.
>> ...also impose a fine in the
amount of $1,000 plus costs and
surcharge, and also order that
you...
>> Many of these people are
poor, they're destitute.
They have no money at all, and
yet they are going to be told to
pay a fine.
They are going to be told to pay
a fee to a probation officer
every month.
>> Have a seat, talk to your
probation officer.
>> I mean, all sorts of
consequences that are going to
flow, and perhaps the one that's
least understood is that the
failure to meet these payments
and meet the conditions of
probation is going to bring that
person right back into court,
and they are going to face
probably more time in prison
than they did originally because
now they are going to be
punished for violating their
probation.
>> There's a lot of harsh
consequences: you may not be
eligible for public housing;
you may lose the right to vote;
you may not be able to get
certain employment.
If you're an immigrant, you may
be deported.
So it's no great shakes to get a
conviction and probation.
>> Well, it's a punishment, but
it certainly beats going to the
penitentiary.
>> NARRATOR: Michael Wells is
not so sure.
When he was arrested in the drug
sweep in Hearne, he had been
serving the last four months of
a prior ten-year probation for a
drug-related crime to which he
had admitted guilt.
>> When I first got put on
probation, I told the judge I
was going to complete it.
And he said, "When you complete
it, I'm going to shake your
hand."
I was looking forward to that
day.
Let him know, "Hey, I did ten
years probation."
So it is people out there that
make mistakes and they correct
it, you know, themselves by
doing.
And when they came up with the
drug bust, it was like, "Oh,
this is a bunch of... this stuff
sucks."
This whole system... probation
sucks.
I'd never take it again, you
know.
>> NARRATOR: Recently, Michael
fell behind in his probation
fees, and was hiding from the
probation officers.
>> I don't got the money.
I get harassed every time I go
in there.
"You need to pay this here."
I was going faithfully before
then, but now since I ain't got
no money and I'm just at a
struggling point right now.
So therefore, I don't want to
look in their faces and hear
their criticism of, "Come up
with this money."
Because every time you go in
there, that's how it goes on.
>> The courts are sort of like
finance companies now.
They are trying to collect all
this money from people.
And, of course, the people don't
have any.
I mean, this is like trying to
get blood out of a turnip.
I mean, we're talking about the
poorest people in our society
who are really barely surviving.
And so they can't pay, so the
probation officer renegotiates
with them.
And sometimes they even go back
to court and extend the
probation.
And so there are always paying.
And it really is very much like
a high-interest loan.
I mean, it's like you can never
get it paid off.
>> NARRATOR: Those indicted in
the drug sweep who refused to
take a plea and couldn't afford
bond spent five months in prison
awaiting trial.
The first trial opened in the
Robertson County courthouse on
February 19, 2001.
It soon became clear that the
evidence was worthless, and that
the confidential informant had
lied to the prosecution.
>> The informant that was used
by the law enforcement was not
credible in his testimony.
And if someone is not credible
to me, then I cannot see putting
that person on the witness stand
and trying a case.
So we dismissed... I dismissed
the cases.
>> NARRATOR: Within a few weeks,
all the cases, except those who
had pled guilty, were dismissed.
But the neighborhood remained
wary.
>> Even though it was thrown
out, they're still not saying
you're not guilty.
The D.A done went in the
newspaper and said even though
the cases were thrown out,
dismissed, they still are
guilty.
You know, he's still telling
people we're guilty.
>> I believe every one of them
was guilty.
But I don't believe the state
had enough evidence to convict
them beyond a reasonable doubt.
>> It was hard.
My children... my oldest
daughter, she felt like I lied
to her.
Children in school making fun of
her, "Your mom's a dope dealer,"
you know.
Oh, you big girl.
I want a formal apology.
The same way, you know, that you
put it out there to the world
that I am guilty of this crime,
I want you to put it out there
to let them know that you made a
mistake.
>> NARRATOR: No apology would
help Erma Faye.
Three years after she pled
guilty in order to go home and
take care of her children, she
was destitute.
Because of the plea, she's
ineligible for both food stamps
for herself and federal grant
money for education.
She cannot vote until two years
after she completes her ten-year
probation.
And she has been evicted from
her public housing for not
paying rent.
Her children sleep in various
homes, and she is homeless.
She spends her nights outside
the housing project waiting for
the morning when she can go to
her work as a cook.
Her job pays her $5.75 cents an
hour.
>> I honestly don't believe she
really understood the full
extent of everything.
She's a single mother, I'm a
single mother.
There is no way we can live
without help from the
government.
We need that help, you know, and
you can't get that... you cannot
get that if you plea out to
this.
>> You know, my people, they
weren't looking out for my kids,
you know, like I look out for
theirs.
>> You don't deserve this.
You really don't.
You don't deserve this.
If I would have stayed, I
wouldn't have let her plea out
for anything.
I know I would have made her
stay right there with me.
Please don't cry.
You gotta be strong.
You've got to.
>> ( crying ) I was just... I
don't know, I was just, you
know, just try to maintain, you
know, I don't know, just
sometimes... I am always
thinking of killing myself to
just get away from this.
>> INTERVIEWER: The pressures?
>> Don't do this to your kids.
They look at your face and they
know something's wrong.
Your oldest child, she know.
She's old enough.
She know.
She can just look at you and
tell, "Mama, something not
right."
>> They saying I owe them
$1,866.
>> NARRATOR: She owes $1,000
fine, court costs, and late
probation fees.
>> They pressure me to pay this
money, which they know I don't
really have.
They see it like as long as I
have a job, you know, I can pay
good.
How you gonna explain to them,
you know, "I'm having a hard
time, you know, I have to buy my
son a medicine."
I have to have his medicine for
his asthma.
They don't really care about
that.
All they want is, you know, was
the money.
>> One of the corrupting
influences in our courts is that
many localities depend upon the
courts as a major source of
revenue; that the speeding
tickets and the driving while
under the influence of alcohol
tickets and the money for
marijuana possession.
And all of these crimes is to
generate money.
But when the courts are in
pursuit of profit, that's in
conflict with being in the
pursuit of justice.
>> NARRATOR: Erma Faye will be
under probation for at least
seven more years.
The fact that her case would
have been dismissed with all the
others, had she not taken the
plea, makes no difference.
>> It's very difficult once
you've pleaded guilty.
The guilty plea sort of puts a
lid on the box regardless of
what's inside the box.
It's a system that's designed to
keep the truth from coming out.
Plea bargaining has nothing to
do with justice.
It has to do with convenience,
expediency, making the life of
prosecutors and defense
attorneys easier and more
profitable.
It's designed to avoid finding
out the truth.
It's designed to avoid hearing
the defendant's story.
( cars honk )
>> NARRATOR: If that's true in
a small town in East Texas, it's
just as true in the big city.
Take the case of Charles Gampero
of Brooklyn, New York.
On December 11, 1994, an
incident happened outside a
bowling alley.
A 33-year-old man was killed.
His name was John Weingrad.
>> One of the detectives greeted
me and he said, "Your son took a
beating."
And I said, "How bad, how badly
was he beaten?"
And he said, "He died."
I said, "Oh, my God."
I said, "Are you crazy?"
>> NARRATOR: A 20-year-old man,
Charlie Gampero, was charged
with murder in the second
degree: murder with intent to
kill.
The defendant had no criminal
record, and the two did not know
each other.
Charlie's father, Charles
Gampero, Sr., was in the bar of
the bowling alley that night.
>> Charlie told me he had a
fight.
I mean, when he came back into
the bowling alley, he was
wearing beige.
He wasn't scuffed.
His clothes weren't messed.
It was like he had just walked
in, like he had just gotten
dressed, left the house, and
walked in.
>> NARRATOR: There was no
question that John Weingrad and
Charlie Gampero had a fight very
late at night outside the
bowling alley.
What was in question was how did
the fight start?
And more importantly, how it
ended.
The photographs the police took
of the dead man showed a badly
bruised face.
The defendant claimed he left
him unharmed.
According to Charlie Gampero, he
was trying to prevent a fight
outside the bowling alley, when
the victim turned around and
punched him.
He then punched him back and
kicked him, leaving him on the
ground but, he says, very much
alive.
>> My father came home later
that night and he had said that
the guy that I had a fight with
had passed away.
I couldn't believe it.
I says, "How?
What happened?"
So I had assumed that maybe
something happened afterwards, I
don't know, because I didn't
think that would have anything
to do with me.
I mean, he was sitting up when I
left.
>> NARRATOR: The details were
murky.
There had been a fight at the
bar of the bowling alley between
John Weingrad and other people
early in the evening before the
defendant got there.
It quieted down, but left people
angry.
Was that a connection to the
killing?
There was something else.
The victim's car was found
outside the bowling alley
wrapped in toilet paper.
According to Joseph Weingrad,
the victim's father, this kind
of harassment had started
happening a few weeks before.
Was this connected to the
killing?
>> The only thing I could tell
you, I said, is that he was
subjected to a lot of harassment
beginning back around Halloween,
when he came home from a
Saturday night and his car was
covered with eggs.
And I asked him, "John, what
happened?"
And he said, "I don't know, I
came out of the bowling alley
and these eggs were all over the
car."
He just assumed that it was just
kids.
But see, the harassment
continued.
There were times when his car
was moved.
As a matter of fact, my wife and
I actually sat one night-- John
parked his car three blocks away
on a Saturday night-- we sat up
here till about 1:00, 1:30 in
the morning, just sitting here
watching his car to see if
anybody would come along and try
to do anything to it, pick it up
or move it, or what have you.
But nothing happened that night.
And so we went home, and John
came home, there was no problem.
And then the following week he
was killed.
>> NARRATOR: The prosecution's
theory of what happened was
completely different.
They believed, they told Mr.
Weingrad, that his son was
killed because of a phone call.
There was a phone call for
Charlie Gampero that night on
the pay phone at the bowling
alley.
It was his girlfriend looking
for him.
Someone answered it and
apparently spoke obscenely to
her.
The prosecution's theory was
that the person who answered the
phone was John Weingrad, and
that's why Charlie Gampero went
after him and killed him.
Charlie Gampero says that's not
true; that he was trying to
break up a fight.
But he never got to tell his
version of the story.
He has never been questioned by
the police, before or after his
arrest.
>> We went in for questioning in
the morning.
When we got there we went to the
detectives' room and the
detective turned to my father,
"Are you Charlie, Sr.?"
He said, "Yes."
He turned to me, "Are you
Charlie, Jr.?"
I said, "Yes."
And he turned to the female
detective and said, "Okay, read
him his rights."
That was it.
>> In a matter of five minutes
that Charlie was there, my
husband called me to tell me,
"Get a lawyer, they arrested
Charlie."
>> NARRATOR: All the theories,
evidence and testimonies were to
be presented to a jury in a
Brooklyn criminal court in
November 1995.
>> Of course I wanted to go to
trial because murder is where
you intend to hurt somebody.
That wasn't my intention.
I didn't intend to hurt anybody.
I wasn't there to get into any
type of fistfight.
I wasn't looking for trouble.
So I didn't understand how they
would have these major charges
against me?
>> I really thought that Charlie
probably would have went to a
trial, you know, and he would
have been acquitted because, you
know, he didn't do it.
>> NARRATOR: Joanne, Charlie's
mother, is remarried and lives
in Florida.
>> Charlie came down with a
friend of his to tell me that
this had happened.
It was just a fight, you know.
They didn't think it wasn't too
serious at that time.
Then my ex-husband called and
said, "We are going to court and
something will happen."
And that's when I flew in.
And that was the first time that
I really realized what was
happening and how serious, and
so on and so forth.
>> INTERVIEWER: Did anyone ever
discuss the possibility of a
plea bargain with you?
>> No, there was never a plea
bargain on the table to my
knowledge-- ever.
>> NARRATOR: But unbeknownst to
them, there was a plea bargain
on the table.
In fact, one had already been
negotiated between the
prosecutor and the victim's
father.
>> I would say probably within
two or three weeks prior to
going into court I was brought
in by the district attorney, Mr.
Gliatta, to his bureau chief.
She sat there and she said to
me, "Mr. Weingrad, there are
some problems with this case.
And we feel we can win the case
in court.
But I just want you to know
there are some problems in the
case, and it might be advisable
to let him plead to a lesser
charge."
If I was thinking clearly, I'd
say, "What are the problems?"
But I wasn't thinking that
clearly at the time.
>> NARRATOR: After discussing
various possibilities in the
D.A.'S office, they agreed upon
a manslaughter charge and a
sentence of seven to 21 years in
prison.
>> I said to the district
attorney and his boss, I said,
"If you can guarantee me that he
cannot get out of prison before
that seven-year term, that he
must spend that full seven
years, I think I will agree then
to accepting a plea bargain."
And they said, "Oh, he'll spend
the whole seven years."
"As a matter of fact," he said,
or she said, rather, "Guarantee
you he'll do ten because he...
when they come up for parole,
they're never granted parole on
the first time around."
I said, "Okay."
And that was it.
>> NARRATOR: Unaware of what had
transpired between the
prosecutor and the victim's
father, the Gampero family went
to court to meet the judge.
>> I mean, he scared me like
nobody has ever scared me in my
life.
I... I... he tells us his name
is Frank Egitto, but they call
him "Maximum Frank."
>> NARRATOR: Judge Egitto, who
served on the bench for 30
years, is now retired and serves
as a judicial hearing officer.
>> I admit it.
My sentences may be a little
more harsh than somebody else's.
But I have to do it according to
my conscience, not someone
else's conscience.
I have to be able to sleep
nights.
And I'll tell you this, I'm a
very peaceful sleeper.
>> NARRATOR: Looking at the
minutes of the case, Judge
Egitto remembered.
>> Something happened as people
were exiting this particular
bar.
The defendant claims that the
deceased struck him.
The defendant responded, not
with a punch, but knocking the
deceased down, kicking and
punching him while he was on the
ground, stomping him while he
was on the ground.
They just went... in my opinion,
he just lost it.
And it was a mean, vicious
attack.
>> Now he's telling us if we go
to trial with this, he will give
my son the maximum of 25 to
life.
He doesn't want to know if he's
innocent.
We had started to pick the jury
already.
I think there were two jurors
picked, if I am not mistaken.
Then they came up with a plea
deal.
Naturally, we said that's crazy,
we didn't want a deal.
>> NARRATOR: The deal offered by
the prosecution was manslaughter
with eight-and-one-third to 25
years in prison, an offer higher
than the one agreed upon with
Mr. Weingrad, which was seven to
21.
Then the judge intervened,
saying he would try to do better
than that.
>> So the judge goes out, comes
back and tells us, "All right, I
just was on the phone with my
boss"-- whoever that was-- "And
they're allowing me to offer you
seven to 21.
>> At that point, it was just
like I wasn't there, like, you
know, you're just in shock.
You just go through the motions,
you can't believe its happened
to you.
It doesn't seem real.
>> I'm sick to my stomach,
because at that time I was 48,
and I said, "By the time my son
gets out, if he gets 25 to life,
he'll... he'll be my age.
They'll... forget about raising
a family, forget about
anything."
>> I didn't feel it was my
decision to make.
I just felt that they had to
decide.
It was going to effect my ex-
husband more than me.
And if I would have pushed to go
to trial and it didn't turn out,
he wouldn't have never forgiven
me.
>> He told me, point blank, told
me and my ex-wife, he said,
"If... I will give your son 25
to life, so you'd better take
the plea.
Or if you don't take the plea,
he's getting it."
>> NARRATOR: According to
Professor Green, these kinds of
threats are constitutional and
legal.
>> Some years ago, a defendant
argued to the Supreme Court it's
inherently coercive if the
prosecutor says to me, "You can
plead guilty and get three years
in jail.
Otherwise, you can go to trial
and have all your trial rights,
but if you're convicted, you
face 30 years in jail."
That sounds like coercion.
And to you and me, and most
ordinary people, that sounds
pretty coercive.
But under the constitution
that's not considered coercive.
And so if you plead guilty
with... in order to avoid
infinitely harsher sentence,
that's considered a voluntary
plea.
>> NARRATOR: The Gampero family
was given the night to weigh
their options.
They had to decide whether to
insist on a trial knowing the
risk of a maximum sentence of 25
to life, or take the guilty plea
with its sentence of seven to 21
years in prison.
They wrestled deep into the
night.
Two decades before, Patsy Kelly
Jarrett was faced with the same
quandary.
>> Being outside is just like a
fading memory.
It's been so long ago, so much
has changed.
The whole world has changed
since I've been out there.
I've been in Bedford Hills since
1977.
I'm one of the longest-serving
inmates.
When you are in prison, you die
inside, you just die.
And what keeps you going is
people that love you and care
about you and that reach out to
you and say, "We love you, we
care about you."
>> NARRATOR: One of those who
reached out to her was law
professor Claudia Angelos.
>> Kelly Jarrett and I are
exactly the same age, we are of
the same generation.
And anyone else who is of that
generation will, I think,
understand the social
circumstances in which she grew
up.
This was in the early '70s that
she was a young woman, maybe 21,
22 years old.
She was pretty marginal.
She's from North Carolina, kind
of a trailer girl, but a good
kid.
She had a car and she had a job
and she had some friends.
>> NARRATOR: In 1973, 23-year-
old Kelly Jarrett took her first
trip out of North Carolina.
It was a trip that would change
her life forever.
>> She had a friend who
suggested, "Oh, let's just get
out of here for the summer."
So she and this friend, who was
a guy, drove up... up through
the South into the Northeast and
up to Utica, New York.
And they kind of landed there
for a few weeks.
Her friend did some day laboring
kind of work.
He used her car.
And she kind of hung out, played
softball, had a little summer
vacation.
Couple weeks later, they made
their way back to North Carolina
and resumed the lives they had
had.
>> About three years passed,
there was a knock on the door
and the police were there with a
warrant for my arrest for a
murder from Utica, New York.
And I was shocked.
I was really upset.
And you know, I called my
parents, you know.
I went down to the police
station.
They came down and met me there.
I took a polygraph while I was
there, and I was locked up until
my parents obtained a counsel
and attorney for me, to help
represent me.
>> It turns out, and it's beyond
any doubt, that the guy she was
with while they were in Utica
robbed a gas station and
murdered the gas station
attendant.
>> NARRATOR: It was the most
brutal murder ever seen in the
small town of Sherrill, near
Utica, New York.
17-year-old star athlete and
high school graduate Paul David
Hatch was bound, gagged, and
killed by a white young man
during an armed robbery of a gas
station.
It was clear that two people
were involved.
According to the eyewitness
testimony of an elderly man, a
second person was outside in a
car.
He wasn't sure if it was a man
or a woman.
>> There was no other evidence
against Kelly Jarrett at all.
That was the evidence.
A man who had said, "I couldn't
see the face, I don't know if it
was a boy or a girl," two and a
half years later said it was
her.
That was the evidence.
There was nothing else
connecting her to that crime.
>> NARRATOR: She was tried
jointly with her co-defendant,
the man she was with that
summer, whose fingerprints were
found at the crime scene.
>> I learned in the courtroom
what happened-- how, when.
It was just awful, you know, it
was just awful to be sitting
there and to be accused of
something like that.
It was just a horrible
experience.
>> NARRATOR: The evidence
against her friend was massive.
The evidence against Kelly
Jarrett was weak.
>> It was an extraordinarily
weak case: this very poor,
extremely unreliable
identification, and nothing
else.
So she was offered a plea of
five to 15 years if she would
plead to the robbery, not to
the... to the murder.
A plea of five to 15 years in
those days meant that absent any
serious misbehavior a person
would be paroled at five years
without any question.
The system is different now, but
it certainly meant that then she
would... at that time, she would
have served five years.
She had already been in jail
waiting for trial for certainly
over a year, as I recall.
So she would have served only
about four more years.
I know she was advised to think
seriously about that plea by her
lawyer.
>> I told my attorney, "You
know, I can't... I can't do
this."
And he said, "Well, you know, my
hands are tied."
He said, "We want to drop the
murder charge on you if you'll
plead guilty to robbery."
And I said, "But I haven't
robbed anybody."
>> The notion of pleading guilty
to something she absolutely
didn't do on the evidence of a
man who didn't even see the face
of the person who was there, was
ridiculous.
And I don't think she seriously
considered taking that plea for
a minute.
>> NARRATOR: She faced the jury
claiming that she had nothing to
do with either the robbery or
the murder.
>> I believed in the American
system of justice.
I believed that you just tell
the truth and the judge and jury
will hear you and, you know,
nothing will happen to you.
But I was wrong.
And I got convicted and was... I
was sentenced to 25 to life.
>> Innocent people are convicted
at trial.
So this happens at trial.
People who defend plea
bargaining will say, "Well,
sending people to trial doesn't
necessarily guarantee perfect
results."
But what the guilty-plea system
guarantees is that when you have
miscarriages of justice, the
victim of it is going to face
staggering sentences because
those sentences are not a
consequence of justice.
Those sentences are a
consequence of the need to
grease the wheels of the system.
So they become the example, they
become the grease, or they
become the object lesson.
And what we see, the next time
around the prosecutors says,
"Well, you want to go to trial,
that's your right, you can be
just like Mrs. So and So, and
look what happened to her."
>> NARRATOR: After a night of
soul searching, Charlie Gampero
came to the same conclusion that
Kelly Jarrett had.
He wanted a trial.
His parents were anxious.
>> Charlie had decided he was
not going to take it.
>> Charlie wanted to plead "not
guilty."
And I didn't say anything at
that time when he said, you
know, "I'm pleading not guilty
we're going to go to court with
this."
So I didn't say anything.
I was nervous.
>> And then the attorney said,
"Well, you know, this is a
Friday, and we do have a lot of
family out of town and would
like to have till Monday to
think about it and discuss it."
So he said, "No, no, no, if you
do that, the D.A. has got to
work all weekend getting their
witnesses together and, you
know, we can't do that and, you
know, put it off."
And it says in the minutes,
"Let's get this in and out," you
know.
He was in a hurry to, you know,
get it off the table and on.
>> INTERVIEWER: The Judge?
>> Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
>> My job was to expedite the
movement of cases.
My delaying this case delays the
next case, which delays the next
case.
If I went till Monday, and then
they decided not to take the
plea on Monday, I would have to
adjourn the case again for the
purpose of the D.A. making sure
they had all their witnesses.
>> I'm saying to myself, it's
been a year.
If the prosecution doesn't have
their case already ready, what's
the difference whether I tell
him I'm going to trial over the
weekend or not?
Were they going to get it ready
in two days?
>> And the judge said, "No,
you've got exactly 15 minutes.
You go outside, you talk to your
clients, and you're back in here
in 15 minutes with the decision.
And I'm telling you now, if you
do not take the plea and I find,
or we find your client guilty,
he's going to get 25 to life.
And once the trial commences, I
will not entertain any pleas.
The trial will go through to its
conclusion.
And if he's guilty, 25 to life.
Go talk to your client."
>> So we are in the hall of the
courtroom, someone came out and
told us, "The judge would like
you to come inside, they're
bringing in another case for the
sentencing."
>> NARRATOR: The case was a
young man who had charges
similar to Charlie's.
>> So the kid came in, they
found him guilty, and he told
the kid, "I am sentencing you to
25 to life.
Now whether he did this to scare
us-- which he already had me
scared, so he... it made it
much, much worse.
>> Anyway, I go out in the
hallway and it's me, my father
and my mother.
And they're telling me... I
think my mother had says, "You
know, if you get 25 to life, I
might not be alive when you come
home.
Who knows what could happen in
that many years?"
>> I had to walk away, and I
just walked away you know
hysterical crying by myself.
I mean, it was really... it was
very emotional, very, very, very
emotional.
Very sad.
>> We were crying like babies.
But that's all he wanted.
He wanted that decision then and
now, he didn't want to know
anything.
>> I'm saying to myself, well,
this is the judge that's going
to be handling the trial.
This guy is going to make the
decision.
If my lawyer objects something,
he's going to decide whether it
is going to upheld or sustained,
whatever.
You know, now I'm against
everybody.
Who's on my side here?
My lawyer was standing like on
the other side of the hallway,
and I was kind of looking at him
like, "Are you going to give me
any type of advice here?
Are you going to tell me
anything, like should I do it,
shouldn't I do it?
You don't have to guarantee me
anything, but you know better
than me.
Explain something to me.
Tell me something."
>> INTERVIEWER: He didn't?
>> No.
>> I just don't think that he
was either... I don't say that
he wasn't prepared, but I don't
think it... maybe it was over
his head or he didn't know what
to do, and I don't think he had
a good solution to the problem.
>> He turned around and he said
to me, "Charlie," he says, "I'll
tell you the truth," he says,
"I don't even... I can't even
give you an answer."
Because I said, "What should I
do?"
He says, "I don't know."
He says, "I have a..."
He has a young son also."
He says, "I can't even tell you
what to do."
I mean, he felt for us.
He says, "I've never seen it
where they force you or put your
back against the wall like
this."
>> A lawyer who goes to trial
has a strong duty to investigate
the case, to interview
witnesses, to look for defenses,
to prepare for cross
examination.
A lawyer who plans to plead
guilty can make a tactical
judgment that it's not worth his
time.
So in effect, the defendant not
only waives his right to a
public trial and all that that
entails, he also, in practice,
is waiving his right to legal
research and to thorough factual
investigation by his own lawyer.
>> NARRATOR: Charlie Gampero now
believes that his lawyer was not
prepared to go to trial.
And since he never previously
told the family about the plea,
he may have been just as
surprised by it as they were.
The lawyer refused to talk to
Frontline , or help in any way
with this documentary.
>> I guess at that point Charlie
felt that maybe it was a good
idea to take it.
Judge Egitto kept making us
think that he had this good deal
for us of seven to 21, you know,
there'd be programs, there'd be
this, he'd be out in seven
years, you know.
Yeah, we just passed the eight-
year mark.
>> We took the plea agreement
thinking that the judge knew
what he was talking about and my
son would be home by the time
he's 27.
"27," I said, "Charlie, you
could still raise a family, you
could still have a good life."
It didn't work out.
>> It was just like, you know, I
just wanted to take it away from
them.
You know, why are they... why
does my family got to go through
this?
So it seemed like this is what
they wanted.
Not that they wanted me to go to
prison, but...
So I, you know, I decided, I
told my lawyer, "All right,
we're going to take the seven to
21."
And that was it.
>> Any of us will plead guilty
if the disparity between what
we're threatened with if we go
to trial and lose and what we
get if we don't is increased
enough.
>> NARRATOR: There is no greater
disparity than in a death
penalty case, when the choice is
between a guilty plea with an
immediate release and a possible
execution.
In February 1999, an
unprecedented fourth capital
murder trial was about to begin
in Bastrop, Texas.
It had a 20-year-old history.
Three trials had already taken
place.
Prosecutors and defense
attorneys had come and gone.
A death sentence had been
imposed, reversed, re-imposed,
and then reversed again.
This was to be the end of the
road, the very last trial of
Kerry Max Cook.
Paul Nugent has been his defense
attorney since 1991.
>> We're actually in the
courtroom for a pre-trial
hearing.
The district attorney's first
assistant comes to me and pulls
me aside and kind of stuns me,
says, "Will Kerry consider a
plea bargain?"
It was shocking and surprising
because for 20 years all you had
heard from the district
attorney's office was this
vicious rhetoric that Kerry was
this heinous criminal who
deserved to be executed for the
rape and mutilation of this
young woman.
And all of a sudden, they are
offering him freedom.
All he has to say is one word
and he gets to go home: guilty.
>> NARRATOR: Kerry Max Cook was
arrested in August 1977 when he
was 21 years old.
Charged with a brutal murder and
rape of 21-year-old Linda Jo
Edwards in Tyler, Texas.
He was tried one year later.
>> Kerry was a young kid, he was
a high school dropout, and his
biggest sin in East Texas in the
1970s was he was allegedly
homosexual.
It's a very religious community,
there.
It's a part of the American
Bible belt.
That was a major strike against
Kerry.
>> I can't tell you what that
was like sitting at that defense
table and having the prosecution
raise his voice like in that
southern Baptist way with the
fire and the brimstone, and
pointing almost inches from my
nose and screaming, "It's time
to put all the freaks and the
murderous homosexuals on the
scrap heap of humanity where
they belong."
I mean, just screaming.
I'm sitting there like his
breath is blowing my hair back
out of my face.
>> NARRATOR: Convicted and
sentenced to death, he spent
years on death row, where he was
abused and raped.
He tried to commit suicide, and
was saved.
He then tried again by
mutilating himself.
He left a note: "I really was an
innocent man."
The prosecution did not see it
as a desperate act, but as a
confirmation of a disturbed
killer.
He had spent 13 brutal years on
death row, when his sentence was
reversed based on a
technicality.
That's when Paul Nugent became
his lawyer.
>> The issue is, has the state
proven their capital murder case
by proof beyond a reasonable
doubt?
>> NARRATOR: The new trial, with
a new district attorney, took
place in 1992, and resulted in a
hung jury.
The state then retried the case
once more.
>> ...to find this defendant
guilty of capital murder because
that is the crime he committed
on June 10, 1977.
>> NARRATOR: The death penalty
was reinstated.
Then once again in 1996, the
Texas court of criminal appeals
reversed the conviction.
It also published a scathing
critique of the conduct of both
the police and the prosecution
going back to the first trial in
1978.
They wrote that the
investigation was intentionally
misleading, the key witness
Robert Hoehn's testimony was
"prejudicial," and the first
conviction was obtained through
fraud and in violation of the
law.
>> The highest criminal court of
Texas found substantial and
egregious and systematic
prosecutorial misconduct in
Kerry's case.
We're not talking about an
isolated act.
We're not talking about one
instance of police or
prosecutorial misconduct.
We're talking about systematic
misconduct.
>> NARRATOR: Even the then-new
first assistant D.A., the man
who fiercely prosecuted Cook in
the last two trials, David
Dobbs, agrees.
>> Let me make it real clear to
you, this prosecution of Kerry
Max Cook was mishandled from the
start.
There were problems.
And there's no question that
there were things that were done
that were unfair to him.
I've never indicated anything
other than that.
>> NARRATOR: And yet that didn't
deter Dobbs from going on
fighting to put Cook to death.
>> I'm completely 100% convinced
that Kerry Max Cook is guilty.
>> NARRATOR: He wanted to use
the final chance of a fourth
trial to convict Cook.
But this time, he had to do it
without the testimony of his key
witness.
He was worried.
>> The Texas Court of Criminal
Appeals, which is the highest
court in Texas, had ruled that
we could not use the testimony
of the man that was with Mr.
Cook just prior to the
commission of the offense, based
on prosecutorial misconduct that
had taken place in the '70s.
We... without that testimony, we
could not place Mr. Cook at the
crime scene the night that the
actual capital murder took
place.
>> NARRATOR: The irony was that
the testimony of the witness,
Robert Hoehn, who had died in
the meantime, was the example
cited by the Texas court of
criminal appeals as prejudicial
and contradictory.
So what the prosecutor was
saying was that if he couldn't
use the prior testimony, he
couldn't win the case.
>> If we could have read in his
testimony, even though, as you
have pointed out there are some,
you know, there are some
problems with it-- like any
other testimony, there's some
good with the bad-- if we could
have read in the testimony and
proved his proximity to the
crime scene, we would have gone
ahead and tried the case.
>> NARRATOR: He weighed his
options: he could go to trial
with what he felt was a weak
case; he could try to get Cook
to take a guilty plea; or he
could dismiss the case.
>> We were not about to dismiss
the case, because he's guilty.
>> The prosecutor offered if
Kerry would plead guilty he'd
get out, his case would be over
with.
He'd have to plead guilty to
time served.
I went and talked to Kerry, and
Kerry looked me in the eye and
said, "I want to go home, I want
to be free, I want this behind
me, but I will go back to death
row, I will let them strap me to
the gurney and put the poison in
my veins before I lie, before I
plead guilty."
>> It's all I had left.
I was innocent.
They... after what they had done
to me, and they'd convinced the
people of America that I was
this raping homosexual maniacal
murderer, alls I had left was my
integrity, my honesty, and the
truth.
And the truth was that I did not
rape and kill Linda Jo Edwards,
and no one was going to say that
I did.
No one was going to make me
carry that burden.
>> NARRATOR: What happens when
the defendant refuses to plead
guilty and the prosecutor is
afraid to lose the trial but
will not dismiss the case?
There was one more possible
option.
The Supreme Court decided in
1970 that it does not violate
the constitution for a defendant
to make a deal and plead guilty,
while still maintaining his
innocence.
Such a plea is called an Alford
plea, or a no-contest plea.
>> It is perfectly
constitutional to accept a plea
of "guilty but not guilty."
That is, the defendant can say,
"I didn't do it, but I want to
take the deal."
And the Judge can say, "Okay,"
which means that it's not
necessary for an innocent person
to lie, to take the deal.
He can say he is innocent and
still take the deal.
>> The Supreme Court says you
can plead no contest, you can...
But most prosecutors will not
let a defendant enter a plea
of nolo contendre or "no
contest," the way Spiro Agnew
did.
Defendants are pretty much
required to either go to trial
or admit their guilt.
>> NARRATOR: This prosecutor
felt he had little choice.
He offered Kerry Max Cook the
no contest plea, which means
that Cook can maintain his
innocence while knowing that the
court has convicted him.
It's the only time it has ever
happened in a death penalty case
in Texas.
>> It's the hardest decision
we've ever had to make, but
unfortunately, we were faced
with the choice of doing
something that would ensure that
he was convicted of murder or
running a very, in my opinion,
substantial risk that without
the testimony of Bob Hoehn he
would walk the streets free from
this.
>> They couldn't admit they had
made a mistake, they couldn't
admit that perhaps the State of
Texas almost executed an
innocent man.
So, it was cover for them.
It was political cover is what
the plea bargain was.
>> NARRATOR: Cook now had to
make his life-or-death decision.
>> My lawyers told me it was my
decision.
Paul Nugent said, "We could win
it, Kerry.
I think you will be acquitted
this time."
I'd heard that before.
The truth had rung in my ears
for so long I couldn't hear it
anymore.
I've given them 22 years.
I just didn't want to give them
anymore.
Too much.
>> INTERVIEWER: So you took it.
>> I took it.
And I regret it everyday.
>> NARRATOR: Then almost out of
the blue, two months after Kerry
Max Cook took the no contest
plea, and 22 years after the
murder, the result of a DNA
analysis of a semen stain found
on the victim's panties came
out.
It did not match Cook's.
The prosecution says that these
findings were not exculpatory,
and that Kerry Max Cook was, and
remains, guilty.
>> At a moment like this, just a
nightmare for me.
The state of Texas has executed
me over 1,000 times.
>> NARRATOR: Kerry Max Cook went
on to play himself in the play
"The Exonerated."
>> I get these nightmares.
Sometimes I forget I'm really
here.
>> NARRATOR: Of the eight
characters on the stage, he is
the only one who is still a
convicted murderer.
>> We'll show the world once and
for all that he committed that
murder.
>> The idea that he is going
around the country in a play
that purports him to be
exonerated and innocent is very
distressing to me.
But the important thing for us
was to insure that he got a
conviction for murder that would
follow him for the rest of his
life.
>> 22 years.
>> NARRATOR: It does follow him.
Married with a young child, he
says the state granted him his
freedom, but neither his dignity
nor his peace of mind.
>> The punishment never ended.
Say one of my taillights goes
out, I'm unaware of it, and then
the police pull me over.
They run that license plate
and... First of all, they don't
get out of their car until
they've got two or three more
backups.
I'm sitting there waiting,
looking in the rearview mirror
saying, "I know what's going on,
but I wonder how bad this is
going to be because I'm Kerry
Cook with a capital murder
conviction."
"So let's get out and spread
'em."
Do you have any knives, have any
guns, have any drugs or, you
know, where were you at last
night?"
I don't have any rights left.
It's a very, very traumatic
ordeal.
So, you know, was it worth it?
Sometimes when I'm holding my
son I can say yes.
Sometimes when I'm by myself I
say no.
They won.
>> NARRATOR: Ten years have
passed since Kelly Jarrett
rejected her plea bargain and
was sentenced to 25 to life.
Then she suddenly got another
chance at freedom when she met
Claudia Angelos.
In 1986, Claudia was a young law
professor at New York
University.
>> I had a little program in
which some law students went to
the Bedford Hills Correctional
facility to teach inmates about
the law.
And I had been doing this for a
couple of months when I got a
phone call from the warden, we
call them, the superintendent of
Bedford Hills, a man named Frank
Hedley, who said, "I wonder if
you can help me.
I have someone in here I think
is innocent."
>> NARRATOR: Abbe Smith, now a
professor of law at Georgetown
University, was one of the law
students at the time.
>> It was my second year in law
school, and I signed up to be
part of what was then called the
Prison Law Clinic.
There were a bunch of cases that
we could have worked on.
And the teacher, Claudia
Angelos, basically sort of
presented all the cases, and she
described Kelly's case, and I
immediately said that's the one
I want to work on.
>> And we filed ultimately a
petition for habeas corpus,
it's called in the federal
court, challenging the validity
of the eyewitness identification
by the... by the old man.
>> NARRATOR: To their surprise
and delight, the habeas was
granted.
Kelly Jarrett was to be released
or retried.
>> Claudia calls me up and she
says, "We won.
It's fantastic, we won."
And I said, "That's great."
And she said, "Not so fast.
You know, the state is going to
appeal it and the circuit court
is not going to be as good."
And in the meantime, Kelly's
offered a plea.
>> "If you'll take the plea,
we'll give you time served,
essentially time served if
you'll just take this plea."
>> She asked me what I would do,
I told her I would take it.
She asked me what I thought she
should do.
I told her she should take it.
She asked, "What if I don't?"
And I said, "I'll fight for you,
I'll keep fighting for you.
We'll do our best, but we might
lose."
She said, "Let me think about
it."
She said, "No, I'm not going to
do it, no, I'm not going to do
it."
I said, "Please think about it,
please talk to other people
about it.
I think you're making a mistake,
but it's your decision."
>> I told them I... in my heart
I just couldn't do it.
It was just... my conscience and
in my heart and it's just
morally wrong to say you did
something you know in your heart
you didn't do.
I couldn't live with myself if I
did that.
I couldn't just... I just
couldn't live with myself.
I saw the pictures of the young
man and, you know, just... it
was just for them to want me to
say that I did something so
horrible just to get out of
prison, I just couldn't do it.
>> I understood that.
I understood it.
I thought it was foolish, but I
understood it.
I let her do it.
>> INTERVIEWER: She couldn't
convince you?
>> She tried, she really tried.
She said, "You know, if you
don't take this plea you may
spend the rest of your life in
prison."
And I said, "I just can't do it.
I just can't do it."
>> She couldn't do it.
That God... she's a religious
woman, that God wouldn't let her
do it, that it would be wrong,
it would be lying, and that she
would rather stay where she was
than commit fraud just to get
out.
And I accept... I accepted her
decision, and I left.
>> NARRATOR: After Kelly Jarrett
refused the plea offer, the
State won the appeal and she
remained in prison to serve the
rest of her sentence, which may
be the rest of her life.
>> And I regret it every day of
my life, every day of my life.
I could have insisted, I think I
could have.
As I've often thought, I should
have reached across the table
and grabbed her by the throat
and said, I'll quit, I won't
represent you.
You must do this, you have no
choice."
And these last... these last 20
years she'd have been with us,
instead of buried in there.
>> I love Abbe and Claudia, but
in my heart it's just not the
right thing for me to do.
>> Well, in the end of the day,
in this case, evidently the
client has certain values that
she places above liberty.
Now it's a sad thing, and what
occasions it is the conviction
of an innocent person.
But from the lawyer's
perspective, you have to respect
the client's decision at the end
of day.
If she understands what the
stakes are and she knows her own
values, she's entitled to say,
"I just won't say I'm guilty
because I'm not."
>> NARRATOR: Abbe Smith, who has
been Kelly Jarrett's attorney
for the last ten years, does not
see it that way.
>> I would have made her plead
guilty.
I would have been relentless.
I would have brought her brother
up to Bedford Hills prison to
put pressure on her to plead...
I would have brought her father,
who was aging and infirm, up
there to Bedford Hills prison.
If I had to drive down to North
Carolina myself and put them in
my car, I would have brought
them up to the prison and I
would have ganged up on her.
And I would have had them beg
her, and I would have had them
cry, and I would have had them
say, "Please, you know, you only
have this one life."
I, you know, I would have had
her father say, "I don't want to
die when you're in prison.
And I would have said to Kelly,
"You know what, you can fight
for your good name outside the
prison walls, but get out
first."
>> NARRATOR: Bruce Barket is a
defense lawyer in Long Island,
New York.
>> I know what I would tell my
client.
"Out is out."
"Out is out.
"Get out.
Get out."
I mean, and I tell them that,
when they're confronted with
whether or not to plead guilty.
I don't' want to stand next to
somebody whose pleading guilty
to a crime they didn't commit.
But I don't want to be standing
next to somebody when they are
wrongfully convicted of a
charge... a crime they didn't
commit, and get much more time.
So I say... I mean, I am not shy
about trying cases, I am not shy
about fighting the government,
but out is out.
>> There's a line that you can't
cross, and it's not clear where
the line is.
But at some point what you're
doing stops being giving
information, stops being
persuasion, and it starts
becoming coercive, and you're
not supposed to cross that line
if you're a lawyer.
>> You know, most of us don't
become criminal defense lawyers
cause we want to make innocent
people plead guilty.
But the system stinks.
And here's somebody who had been
locked up for ten years in a
maximum security prison and
everybody knew that the Court of
Appeals was going to reverse.
There is this one moment, this
one opportunity to free her.
And I would have done everything
within my power to get her to
plead guilty.
>> That's like, say like you had
a daughter and she's carrying a
baby and she doesn't want to
have an abortion, but you're
forcing her to have one.
I mean, I feel she should have
the choice not to do that.
And I feel that I should have
the choice for my own life not
to do something that I feel is
wrong.
>> Hers is an exceptional
reaction.
Most people do the obvious self-
serving thing, and that is they
buckle in those circumstances
and they bear false witness
against themselves.
That's what plea bargaining asks
you to do: confess yourself
guilty.
>> NARRATOR: In Brooklyn, New
York, after Charlie Gampero took
the guilty plea, he learned that
he then had to confess to every
detail of the crime he had pled
to.
>> The judge wants me to say
what happened.
He asked me what happened that
night.
So I told him that, you know,
when I went outside, um, he hit
me, Mr. Weingrad hit me and I
hit him back.
When he fell on the floor, I
kicked him and I punched him.
He went crazy.
That was not what he wanted to
hear.
>> NARRATOR: Bruce Barket is
Charlie's present lawyer.
>> The judge knew that
allocution, that statement by
Mr. Gampero didn't warrant a
guilty plea.
It should go to trial if that's
the truth.
So the judge, "I want a guilty
plea.
I know it has to be sufficient."
He says, "That's not right, you
got to tell me more."
>> So he yells at my lawyer and
tells my lawyer, "Can you please
explain to Mr. Gampero that he
has to say what happened here,
he has to be honest with what
happened here."
>> NARRATOR: Judge Egitto agreed
to go over the minutes.
>> The court: I went out of my
way to try-- dash, dash-- I want
a candid statement of what
happened, what transpired.
This man did not die from one
punch.
I saw the pictures."
>> My lawyer basically told me,
"You have to agree with what he
says."
So now the judge tells me what
happened.
>> The court: "Kicked him and
stomped him?"
The defendant: "I kicked him,
yes."
"And you stomped him?"
"Yes."
"And by doing that you intended
to inflict serious physical
injury to this person?"
"Yes."
>> "Yes, yes."
And I just kept yessing
whatever... anything he said I
said yes to, "Yes, Sir," "Yes,
Sir," "Yes, sir."
>> "You weren't satisfied with
just knocking him down and
walking away, were you?"
Answer: "No."
"You wanted to make sure he
didn't get up again."
"Right."
"Yes": the defendant.
>> So he basically went down and
said everything that happened.
I just yes and no'd it.
>> The court: "Is that plea
satisfactory?"
Ms. Block, the D.A.: "Yes, Your
Honor."
>> And he tells me off the
record, he says, "Make sure that
when you go for the pre-sentence
report, make sure you tell them
the same thing."
And that was it.
I walked out of the courtroom.
>> INTERVIEWER: You mean don't
change your story?
>> Yeah, basically.
Not my story, don't change my
story.
Don't change his story.
It wasn't my story anymore.
>> It's a coerced confession.
You can sort of satisfy your
conscience with this salve of "I
made him say he did it."
And he's saying, "Well, okay,
you son of a bitch, if I got to
say I did it to take the deal,
I'll say it.
Do you feel better now?"
>> INTERVIEWER: Do you believe
that what the defendant was
saying when he was answering all
your questions was the truth?
>> Do I believe it?
I have to, otherwise I couldn't
have... I would not have taken
the plea.
I would not have taken the plea.
>> INTERVIEWER: Because he
started by saying that he
punched him and kicked him once,
and you said, "No way."
>> But then he came around...
before I said anything else, he
came around to punching and
kicking him while he was on the
ground, and I added the word
"and stomping him?"
And that's when he said, "Yes."
But I never put those words in
his mouth.
Right?
I only added the word
"stomping."
Those were his words, not mine.
He knows what he was indicted
for, he knows what he did.
>> NARRATOR: Joseph Weingrad,
the victim's father, is not as
sure anymore.
A former investigator himself,
he began to have doubts about
the police investigation and the
sentence.
>> If you don't go to trial and
you don't get this discovery,
and you don't get people getting
up there and putting their hands
on the bible and swearing to
tell the truth, you are not
going to find out what really
happened.
>> NARRATOR: He began his own
investigation.
He filed a civil suit against
the bowling alley, and combed
through all the facts the
investigators discovered.
He came to believe, he said,
that the police investigation
was sloppy, that the so-called
witnesses were inconsistent, and
that no one saw his son take the
phone call.
He felt that other people who
had harassed his son before had
to be involved, and that Charlie
Gampero, who punched and kicked
John Weingrad, was probably not
the one who killed him.
He went to see the district
attorney.
>> I just hit them straight on.
I said, "I am not faulting you
as a district attorney.
I believe that you did a
terrific job in the courtroom.
You bluffed that defense
attorney."
I said, "Paul, you didn't stand
a Chinaman's chance of
convicting Charles Gampero if
they went to trial."
As a matter of fact, if I had
been the attorney, I would have
blew you out of the water.
There's no way you could have
convicted him.
I said, "But, you know, with
your list of so-called witnesses
and the judge telling Gampero's
lawyer you got 15 minutes to
make a decision or else you're
going to trial, and if we go to
trial and you're found guilty
you're going to get 25 to life,
and I won't entertain any pleas
once the trial commences, the
trial will go through to its
conclusion and he'll get 25 to
life if he's guilty."
Scared the hell out of everybody
on that side, and they caved in.
>> NARRATOR: He left the
district attorney's office, he
said, "Unsatisfied."
>> INTERVIEWER: What did he say?
>> He didn't say anything.
Well, I had nothing more to say
at that point because I
understood right then and there
he had no intention of going any
further with this.
So I dropped it.
>> NARRATOR: Charlie Gampero
began his prison sentence of
seven to 21 years in January
1996.
There was no early release.
The earliest he could be out, if
granted parole, was 2003.
It was also in 2003 when Kelly
Jarrett got a hearing in front
of the clemency board.
After 26 years in prison, she
began to think for the first
time of life on the outside.
>> I had plans for my life to go
to the convent, become a
Franciscan sister and to just
live my life outside of prison
walls.
>> NARRATOR: The clemency was
not granted.
There was no explanation.
Only two clemencies were granted
by Governor Pataki that year,
one of which went to the
satirist Lenny Bruce, who died
37 years before.
>> As my grandmother would say,
"He should rest in peace."
But I don't think he's up there
in heaven saying that, you know,
it was good that he got
clemency.
He's probably saying, "She
should have gotten it, give it
to her."
>> INTERVIEWER: Were you
disappointed?
>> Yes.
>> INTERVIEWER: So what's going
to happen now?
>> It's up... ( choking up )
...excuse me, it's up to the
parole board.
>> NARRATOR: The first parole
hearing for Kelly Jarrett will
take place in 2005, but her
dilemma may very well follow
her.
Parole boards expect admission
of wrongdoing and expression of
remorse.
Locked up for almost 30 years
for claiming she is innocent, it
would be hard to imagine her
saying she is not.
Towards the end of his seventh
year in prison, Charlie Gampero
appeared before his parole
board.
By then, witnesses had come
forward testifying that they saw
other people beating and kicking
John Weingrad after Charlie had
left the scene.
Charlie was hopeful.
He talked to his parole officer
who thought he had done
everything that the prison asked
him to do, and that he was ready
to be released.
>> I had told them that even
though there was other people
involved and something happened
after I left, I still take
responsibility for the crime
because I set, you know, I put
him there.
I explained to them, you know,
what my ambitions were when I
went home.
I explained to them what I have
done during my incarceration.
And they told me I'd receive a
response in a couple of days.
>> NARRATOR: The parole was
denied.
The reason given was that since
he was a violent offender,
discretionary release would be
contrary to the best interest of
the community.
>> It's more than I thought he
would be in prison.
I thought he'd be out by seven
years, and maybe even earlier,
because of the... they had an
early release program for a
while.
>> INTERVIEWER: But they didn't
by then.
>> As was sung by that famous
star, que sera sera, I can't
control them.
>> NARRATOR: It was just what
the prosecutor had promised the
victim's father seven years
before when they agreed on the
plea.
But by then, Joseph Weingrad
wanted Charlie Gampero out of
prison, and wrote a letter to
the parole board.
>> I wrote that it seemed to me
that Mr. Gampero was probably
only guilty of assault, and so
the time that he spent in prison
was enough.
He shouldn't be spending 21
years for something that I don't
believe he did!
>> NARRATOR: Charlie Gampero's
next parole hearing will take
place in October 2004.
There is also a new motion
pending to vacate his sentence.
If both were denied, then
according to the structure of
his sentence, he could spend
another six years in prison.
>> No, that isn't the way the
justice system is supposed to
work in this country.
It's not supposed to work that
way.
>> This report continues on
Frontline's Web site, where you
can read extended interviews
with judges and national
experts on plea bargaining.
>> ...the plea system guarantees
is that when you...
>> Find out more about the cases
Frontline featured.
>> The system stinks.
>> Get answers to frequently
asked questions about plea
bargaining, plus readings,
analysis, and the option to
watch the full program online.
Then join the discussion at
pbs.org.
>> Support for Frontline is
provided by US News & World
Report.
>> Trust.
For over 70 years, a commitment
to playing it straight, getting
it right.
US News & World Report.
Trust matters.
>> Frontline is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.